---
title: Why async Rust?
url: https://without.boats/blog/why-async-rust/
published: "2023-10-15T00:00:00Z"
feed: boats
guid: https://without.boats/blog/why-async-rust/
---

# Why async Rust?

Async/await syntax in Rust was initially released to much fanfare and excitement. To quote [Hacker\
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21473418) at the time:

> This is going to open the flood gates. I am sure lot of people were just waiting for this moment
> for Rust adoption. I for one was definitely in this boat.
>
> Also, this has all the goodness: open-source, high quality engineering, design in open, large
> contributors to a complex piece of software. Truly inspiring!

Recently, the reception has been a bit more mixed. To a quote a comment on [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37436413) again,
discussing a recent blog post on the subject:

> I genuinely can’t understand how anybody could look at the mess that’s Rust’s async and think that
> it was a good design for a language that already had the reputation of being very complicated to
> write.
>
> I tried to get it, I really did, but my god what a massive mess that is. And it contaminates
> everything it touches, too. I really love Rust and I do most of my coding in it these days, but
> every time I encounter async-heavy Rust code my jaw clenches and my vision blurs.

Of course, neither of these comments are completely representative: even four years ago, some people
had pointed concerns. And in the same thread as this comment about jaws clenching and vision
blurring, there were many people defending async Rust with equal fervor. But I don’t think I would
be out of pocket to say that the nay-sayers have grown more numerous and their tone more strident as
time has gone on. To some extent this is just the natural progression of the hype cycle, but I also
think as we have become more distant from the original design process, some of the context has been
lost.

Between 2017 and 2019, I drove the design of async/await syntax, in collaboration with others and
building on the work of those who came before me. Forgive me if I am put a bit off when someone says
that they don’t know how anyone could look at that “mess” and “think that it was a good design,” and
please indulge me in this imperfectly organized and overly long explanation of how async Rust came
to exist, what its purpose was, and why, in my opinion, for Rust there was no viable alternative. I
hope that along the way I might shed more light on the design of Rust in a broader and deeper sense,
at least slightly, and not merely regurgitate the justifications of the past.
