---
title: Pin
url: https://without.boats/blog/pin/
published: "2024-07-19T00:00:00Z"
feed: boats
guid: https://without.boats/blog/pin/
---

# Pin

The `Pin` type (and the concept of _pinning_ in general) is a foundational building block on which
the rest of the the Rust async ecosystem stands. Unfortunately, it has also been one of the least
accessible and most misunderstood elements of async Rust. This post is meant to explain what `Pin`
achieves, how it came to be, and what the current problem with `Pin` is.

There was an interesting [post](https://www.modular.com/blog/mojo-vs-rust-is-mojo-faster-than-rust) a few months ago on the blog of the company Modular, which is
developing a new language called Mojo. In a brief section discussing `Pin` in Rust, I found that it
very succinctly captured the zeitgeist of the public discussion of the subject:

> In Rust, there is no concept of value identity. For a self-referential struct pointing to its own
> member, that data can become invalid if the object moves, as it’ll be pointing to the old location
> in memory. This creates a complexity spike, particularly in parts of async Rust where futures need
> to be self-referential and store state, so you must wrap Self with Pin to guarantee it’s not going
> to move. In Mojo, objects have an identity so referring to self.foo will always return the correct
> location in memory, without any additional complexity required for the programmer.

Some aspects of these remarks confuse me. The term “value identity” is not defined anywhere in this
post, nor can I find it elsewhere in Mojo’s documentation, so I’m not clear on how Modular claims
that Mojo solves the problem that `Pin` is meant to solve. Despite this, I do think the criticism of
`Pin`’s usability is well stated: there is indeed a “complexity spike” when a user is forced to
interact with it. The phrase I would use is actually a “complexity cliff,” as in the user suddenly
finds themself thrown off a cliff into a sea of complex, unidiomatic APIs they don’t understand.
This is a problem and it would be very valuable to Rust users if the problem were solved.

As it happens, this little corner of Rust is my mess; adding `Pin` to Rust to support
self-referential types was my idea. I have ideas of how this complexity spike could be resolved,
which I will elaborate in a subsequent post. Before I can get there though I need to first try to
explain, as efficiently as I know how, what `Pin` accomplishes, how it came to exist, and why it is
currently difficult to use.
