---
title: On "AI Brendans" or "Virtual Brendans"
url: http://www.brendangregg.com/blog//2025-11-28/ai-virtual-brendans.html
published: "2025-11-27T13:00:00Z"
feed: gregg
guid: http://www.brendangregg.com/blog//2025-11-28/ai-virtual-brendans.html
---

# On "AI Brendans" or "Virtual Brendans"

There are now multiple AI performance engineering agents that use or are trained on my work. Some are helper agents that interpret flame graphs or eBPF metrics, sometimes privately called _AI Brendan_; others have trained on my work to create a _virtual Brendan_ that claims it can tune everything just like the real thing. These virtual Brendans sound like my brain has been uploaded to the cloud by someone who is now selling it (yikes!). I've been told it's even "easy" to do this thanks to all my publications available to train on: >90 talks, >250 blog posts, >600 open source tools, and >3000 book pages. Are people allowed to sell you, virtually? And am I the first individual engineer to be AI'd? (There is a 30-year-old precedent for this, which I'll get to later.)

This is an emerging subject, with lots of different people, objectives, and money involved. Note that this is a personal post about my opinions, not an official post by my employer, so I won't be discussing internal details about any particular project. I'm also not here to recommend you buy any in particular.

## Summary

- **There are two types**:


  - **AI agents**. I've sometimes heard them called an AI Brendan because it does Brendan-like things: systems performance recommendations and interpretation of flame graphs and eBPF metrics. There are already several of these and this idea in general should be useful.
  - **Virtual Brendan** can refer to something not just built on my work, but trained on my publications to create a virtual _me_. These would only automate about 15% of what I do as a performance engineer, and will go out of date if I'm not training it to follow industry changes.
- **Pricing is hard, in-house is easier**. With a typical pricing model of $20 per instance per month, customers may just use such an agent on one instance and then copy-and-paste any tuning changes to their entire fleet. There's no practical way to keep tuning changes secret, either. These projects are easier as internal in-house tools.
- **Some claim a lot but do little**. There's no Brendan Gregg benchmark or empirical measurement of my capability, so a company could claim to be selling a virtual Brendan that is nothing more than a dashboard with a few eBPF-based line charts and a flame graph. On some occasions when I've given suggestions to projects, my ideas have been considered too hard or a low priority. Which leads me to believe that some aren't trying to make a good product -- they're in it to make a quick buck.
- **There's already been one expensive product failure**, but I'm not rushing to conclude that the idea is bad and the industry will give up. Other projects already exist.
- **I’m not currently involved with any of these products**.
- **We need AI to help save the planet from AI**. Performance engineering gets harder every year as systems become more complex. With the rising cost of AI datacenters, we need better performance engineering more than ever. **We need AI agents that claim a lot _and do a lot_**. I wish the best of luck to those projects that agree with this mantra.

## Earlier uses of AI

Before I get into the AI/Virtual Brendans, yes, we've been using AI to help performance engineering for years. Developers have been using coding agents that can help write performant code. And as a performance engineer, I'm already using ChatGPT to save time on resarch tasks, like finding URLs for release notes and recent developments for a given technology. I once used ChatGPT to find and old patch sent to lkml, just based on a broad description, which would otherwise take hours of trial-and-error searches. I keep finding more ways that ChatGPT/AI is useful to me in my work.

## AI Agents (AI Brendans)

A common approach is to take a CPU flame graph and have AI do pattern matching to find performance issues. Some of these agents will apply fixes as well. It's like a modern take on the practice of "recent performance issue checklists," just letting AI do the pattern matching instead of the field engineer.

I've recently worked on a [Fast by Friday](https://www.brendangregg.com/Slides/KernelRecipes2023_FastByFriday/) methodology: where we engineer systems so that performance can be root-cause analyzed in 5 days or less. Having an AI agent look over flame graphs, metrics, and other data sources to match previously seen issues will save time and help make Fast by Friday possible. For some companies with few or no performance engineers, I'd expect matching previously seen issues should find roughly 10-50% performance gains.

I've heard some flame graph agents privately referred to as an "AI Brendan" (or similar variation on my name) and I guess I should be glad that I'm getting some kind of credit for my work. Calling a systems performance agent "Brendan" makes more sense than other random names like Siri or Alexa, so long as end users understand it means a Brendan-like agent and not a full virtual Brendan. I've also suspected this day would come ever since I began my performance career (more on this later).

Challenges:

- **Hard to quantify and sell**. What the product will actually do is unknown: maybe it'll improve performance by 10%, 30%, or 0%. Consider how different this is from other products where you need a thing, it does the thing, you pay for it, the end. Here you need a thing, it might do the thing but no one can promise it, but please pay us money and find out. It's a challenge. Free trials can help, but you're still asking for engineering time to test something without a clear return. This challenge is also present for building in-house tools: it's likewise hard to quantify the ROI.
- **The analysis pricing model is hard**. If this is supposed to be a commercial product (and not just an in-house tool) customers may only pay for one server/instance a month and use that to analyze and solve issues that they then fix on the entire fleet. In a way, you're competing with an established pricing model in this space: _performance consultants_ (I used to be one) where you pay a single expert to show up, do analysis, suggest fixes, and leave. Sometimes that takes a day, sometimes a week, sometimes longer. But the fixes can then be used on the entire fleet forever, no subscription.
- **The tuning pricing model is harder**. If the agent also applies tuning, can't the customer copy the changes everywhere? At least one AI auto-tuner initially explored solving this by keeping the tuning changes secret so you didn't know what to copy-and-paste, forcing you to keep running and paying for it. A few years ago there was a presentation about one of these products with this pricing model, to a room of performance engineers from different companies (people I know), and straight after the talk the engineers discussed how quickly they could uncover the changes. I mean, the idea that a company is going to make some changes to your production systems (including at the superuser level) without telling you what they are changing is a bit batty anyway, and telling engineers you're doing this is just a fun challenge, a technical game of hide and seek. Personally I'd checksum the entire filesystem before and after (there are tools that do this), I'd trace syscalls and use other kernel debugging facilities, I'd run every tool that dumped tunable and config settings and diff it to a normal system, and that's just what comes to mind immediately. Or maybe I'd just run their agent through a debugger (if their T&Cs let me). There are so many ways. It'd have to be an actual rootkit to stand half a chance, and while that might hide things from file system and other syscalls, the weird kernel debuggers I use would take serious effort to disguise.
- **It may get blamed for outages**. Commercial agents that do secret tuning will violate change control. Can you imagine what happens during the next company-wide outage? "Did anyone change anything recently?" "We actually don't know, we run a AI performance tuning agent that changes things in secret" "Uh, WTF, that's banned immediately." Now, the agent may not be responsible for the outage at all, but we tend to blame the thing we can't see.
- **Shouldn't those fixes be upstreamed?** Let's say an agent discovers a Java setting that improves performance significantly, and the customer's engineers figure this out (see previous points). I see different scenarios where eventually someone will say "we should file a JVM ticket and have this fixed upstream." Maybe someone changes jobs and remembers the tunable but doesn't want to pay for the agent, or maybe they feel it's good for the Java community, or maybe it only works on some hardware (like Intel) and that hardware vendor finds out and wants it upstreamed as a competitive edge. So over time the agent finds fewer wins as what it does find gets fixed in the target software.
- **The effort to build**. (As is obvious) there's challenging work to build orchestration, the UI, logging, debugging, security, documentation, and support for different targets (runtimes, clouds). That support will need frequent updates.
- **For customers: AI-outsourcing your performance thinking may leave you vulnerable**. If a company spends less on performance engineers as it's considered AI'd, it will reduce the company's effective "performance IQ." I've already seen an outcome: large companies that spend tens of millions on low-featured performance monitoring products, because they don't have in-house expertise to build something cheaper and better. This problem could become a positive feedback loop where fewer staff enter performance engineering as a profession, so the industry's "performance IQ" also decreases.

So it's easier to see this working as an in-house tool or an open source collaboration, one where it doesn't need to keep the changes secret and it can give fixes back to other upstream projects.

## Virtual Brendans

Now onto the sci-fi-like topic of a virtual me, just like the real thing.

Challenges:

- **My publications are an incomplete snapshot, so you can only make a partial virtual Brendan (at some tasks) that gets out of date quickly**. I think this is obvious to an engineer but not obvious to everyone.


  - **Incomplete**: I've published many blog posts (and talks) about some performance topics (observability, profiling, tracing, eBPF), less on others (tunining, benchmarking), and nearly nothing on some (distributed tracing). This is because blogging is a spare time hobby and I cover what I'm interested in and working on, but I can't cover it all, so this body of published knowledge is incomplete. It's also not as deep as human knowledge: I'm summarizing best practices but in my head is every performance issue I've debugged for the past 20+ years.


    - **Books** are different because in Systems Performance I try to summarize everything so that the reader can become a good performance engineer. You still can't make a virtual Brendan from this book because the title isn't "The Complete Guide to Brendan Gregg.". I know that might be obvious, but when I hear about Virtual Brendan projects discussed by non-engineers like it really is a virtual me I feel I need to state it cleary. Maybe you can make a good performance engineering agent, but consider this: my drafts get so big (approaching 2000 pages) that my publisher complains about needing special book binding or needing to split it into volumes, so I end up cutting roughly half out of my books (an arduous process) and these missing pages are not training AI. Granted, they are the least useful half, which is why I deleted them, but it helps explain something wrong with all of this: The core of your product is to scrape publications designed for human attention spans -- you're not engineering the best possible product, you're just looking to make a quick buck from someone else's pre-existing content. That's what annoys me the most: not doing the best job we could. (There's also the legality of training on copyrighted books and selling the result, but I'm not an expert on this topic so I'll just note it as another challenge.)
  - **Out of date**: Everything I publish is advice at a point in time, and while some content is durable (methodologies) other content ages fast (tuning advice). Tunables are less of a problem as I avoid sharing them in the first place, as people will copy-n-paste them in environments where they don't make sense (so tunables is more of an "incomplete" problem). The out-of-date problem is getting worse because I've published less since I joined Intel. One reason is I've been mentally focused on an internal strategy project. But there is another, newer reason: I've found it hard to get motivated. I now have this feeling that blogging means I'm giving up my weekends, unpaid, to train my AI replacement.
- **So far these AI agents only automate a small part of my job**. The analysis, reporting, and tuning of previously seen issues. It's useful, but to think those activities alone are an AI version of me is misleading. In my prior [post](/blog/2025-08-04/when-to-hire-a-computer-performance-engineering-team-2025-part1.html) I listed 10 things a performance engineer did (A-J), and analysis & tuning is only 2 out of 10 activities. And it's only really doing half of analysis (next point), so 1.5/10 is 15%.
- **Half my analysis work is never-seen-before issues**. In part because seen-before issues are often solved before they reach me. A typical performance engineer will have a smaller but still significant portion of these issues. That's still plenty of issues where there's nothing online about it to train from, which isn't the strength of the current AI agents.
- **”Virtual Brendan" may just be a name**. In some cases, referring to me is just shorthand for saying it's a systems-performance-flame-graphs-ebpf project. The challenge here is that some people (business people) may think it really is a virtual me, but it's really more like the AI Brendan agent described earlier.
- **I don't know everything**. I try to learn it all but performance is a vast topic, and I'm usually at large companies where there are other teams who are better than I am at certain areas. When I worked at Netflix they had a team to handle distributed tracing, so I didn't have to go deep on the topic myself, even though it's important. So a Virtual Brendan is useful for a lot of things but not everything.

## Some Historical Background

**The first such effort that I’m aware of was “Virtual Adrian” in 1994**. Adrian Cockcroft, a performance engineering leader, had a software tool called Virtual Adrian that was described as: "Running this script is like having Adrian actually watching over your machine for you, whining about anything that doesn't look well tuned." (Sun Performance and Tuning 2nd Ed, 1998, page 498). It both analyzed and applied tuning, but it wasn't AI, it was rule-based. I think it was the first such agent based on a real individual. That book was also the start of my own performance career: I read it and _Solaris Internals_ to see if I could handle and enjoy the topic; I didn't just enjoy it, I fell in love with performance engineering. So I've long known about virtual Adrian, and long suspected that one day there might be a virtual Brendan.

There have been other rule-based auto tuners since then, although not named after an individual. Red Hat maintains one called [TuneD](https://github.com/redhat-performance/tuned): a "Daemon for monitoring and adaptive tuning of system devices." Oracle has a newer one called [bpftune](https://github.com/oracle/bpftune) (by Alan Maguire) based on eBPF. (Perhaps it should be called "Virtual Alan"?)

**Machine learning was introduced by 2010**. At the time, I met with mathematicians who were applying machine learning to all the system metrics to identify performance issues. As mathematicians, they were not experts in systems performance and they assumed that system metrics were trustworthy and complete. I explained that their product actually had a "garbage in garbage out" problem – some metrics were unreliable, and there were many blind spots, which I have been helping fix with my tools. My advice was to fix the system metrics first, then do ML, but it never happened.

**AI-based auto-tuning companies arrived by 2020**: Granulate in 2018 and Akamas in 2019. Granulate were pioneers in this space, with a product that could automatically tune software using AI with no code changes required. In 2022 Intel acquired Granulate, a company of [120 staff](https://www.intc.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/1535/intel-to-acquire-granulate), [reportedly](https://www.theregister.com/2022/05/25/intel_granulate_cloud_analysis/?td=keepreading-btm) for USD$650M, to boost cloud and datacenter performance. As shared at Intel Vision, Granulate fit into an optimization strategy where it would help application performance, accomplishing for [example](https://www.theregister.com/2022/05/25/intel_granulate_cloud_analysis/?td=keepreading-btm) "approximately 30% CPU reduction on Ruby and Java." Sounds good. As Intel's press release described, Granulate was expected to lean on Intel's 19,000 software engineers to help it expand its capabilities.

The years that followed were tough for Intel in general. Granulate was renamed "Intel Tiber App-Level Optimization." By 2025 the entire project was reportedly for [sale](https://en.globes.co.il/en/article-intel-weighs-up-future-of-650m-israeli-acquisition-granulate-1001492477) but, apparently finding no takers, the project was simply shut down. An Intel press release [stated](https://en.globes.co.il/en/article-intel-closes-granulate-lays-off-dozens-1001492599): "As part of Intel's transformation process, we continue to actively review each part of our product portfolio to ensure alignment with our strategic goals and core business. After extensive consideration, we have made the difficult decision to discontinue the Intel Tiber App-Level Optimization product line."

I learned about Granulate in my first days at Intel. I was told their product was entirely based on my work, using flame graphs for code profiling and my publications for tuning, and that as part of my new job I had to support it. It was also a complex project, as there was also a lot of infrastructure code for safe orchestration of tuning changes, which is not an easy problem. Flame graphs were the key interface: the first time I saw them demo their product they wanted to highlight their dynamic version of flame graphs thinking I hadn't seen them before, but I recognized them as [d3-flame-graphs](https://github.com/spiermar/d3-flame-graph) that Martin Spier and I created at Netflix.

It was a bit dizzying to think that my work had just been "AI'd" and sold for $650M, but I wasn't in a position to complain since it was now a project of my employer. But it was also exciting, in a sci-fi kind of way, to think that an AI Brendan could help tune the world, sharing all the solutions I'd previously published so I didn't have to repeat them for the umpteenth time. It would give me more time to focus on new stuff.

The most difficult experience I had wasn't with the people building the tool: they were happy I joined Intel (I heard they gave the CTO a standing ovation when he announced it). I also recognized that automating my prior tuning for everyone would be good for the planet. The difficulty was with others on the periphery (business people) who were not directly involved and didn't have performance expertise, but were gung ho on the idea of an AI performance engineering agent. Specifically, a Virtual Brendan that could be sold to everyone. I (human Brendan and performance expert) had no role or say in these ideas, as there was this sense of: "now we've copied your brain we don't need you anymore, get out of our way so we can sell it." This was the only time I had concerns about the impact of AI on my career. It wasn't the risk of being replaced by a better AI, it was being replaced by a worse one that people _think_ is better, and with a marketing budget to make _everyone else_ think it's better. Human me wouldn't stand a chance.

**2025 and beyond**: As an example of an in-house agent, Uber has one called [PerfInsights](https://www.uber.com/en-AU/blog/perfinsights/) that analyzes code profiles to find optimizations. And I learned about another agent, [Linnix](https://x.com/parth21shah/status/1990112782482641006): AI-Powered Observability, while writing this post.

## Final Thoughts

There are far more computers in the world than performance engineers to tune them, leaving most running untuned and wasting resources. In future there will be AI performance agents that can be run on everything, helping to save the planet by reducing energy usage. Some will be described as an AI Brendan or a Virtual Brendan (some already have been) but that doesn't mean they are necessarily trained on all my work or had any direct help from me creating it. (Nor did they abduct me and feed me into a steampunk machine that uploaded my brain to the cloud.) Virtual Brendans only try to automate about 15% of my job (see my prior [post](/blog/2025-08-04/when-to-hire-a-computer-performance-engineering-team-2025-part1.html) for "What do performance engineers do?").

Intel and the AI auto-tuning startup it acquired for $650M (based on my work) were pioneers in this space, but after Intel invested more time and resources into the project it was shut down. That doesn't mean the idea was bad -- Intel's public statement about the shutdown only mentions a core business review -- and this happened while Intel has been struggling in general (as has been widely reported).

Commercial AI auto-tuners have extra challenges: customers may only pay for one server/instance then copy-n-paste the tuning changes everywhere. Similar to the established pricing model of hiring a performance consultant. For 3rd-party code, someone at some point will have the bright idea to upstream any change an AI auto-tuner suggestss, so a commercial offering will keep losing whatever tuning advantages it develops. In-house tools don't have these same concerns, and perhaps that's the real future of AI tuning agents: an in-house or non-commercial open source collaboration.
