---
title: Why hardware development is hard
url: https://danluu.com/hardware-unforgiving/
published: "2013-11-10T00:00:00Z"
feed: danluu
guid: https://danluu.com/hardware-unforgiving/
---

# Why hardware development is hard

In CPU design, most successful teams have a fairly long lineage and rely heavily on experienced engineers. When we look at CPU startups, teams that have a successful exist often have a core team that's been together for decades. For example, PA Semi's acquisition by Apple was a moderately successful exit, but where did that team come from? They were the SiByte team, which left after SiByte was acquired by Broadcom, and SiByte was composed of many people from DEC who had been working together for over a decade. My old company was similar: an IBM fellow collected [the best people he worked with at IBM](http://conservancy.umn.edu/handle/120173) who was a very early Dell employee and then exec (back when Dell still did interesting design work), then split off to create a chip startup. There have been quite a few CPU startups that have raised tens to hundreds of millions and leaned heavily on inexperienced labor; fresh PhDs and hardware engineers with only a few years of experience. Every single such startup I know of failed[1](#fn:2).

This is in stark contrast to software startups, where it's common to see successful startups founded by people who are just out of school (or who dropped out of school). Why should microprocessors be any different? It's unheard of for a new, young, team to succeed at making a high-performance microprocessor, although this hasn't stopped people from funding these efforts.

In software, it's common to hear about disdain for experience, such as Zuckerberg's comment, "I want to stress the importance of being young and technical, Young people are just smarter.". Even when people don't explicitly devalue experience, they often don't value it either. As of this writing, Joel Spolsky's ” [Smart and gets things done](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/GuerrillaInterviewing3.html)” is probably the most influential piece of writing on software hiring. Note that it doesn't say "smart, experienced, and gets things done.". Just "smart and gets things done" appears to be enough, no experience required. If you lean more towards the Paul Graham camp than the Joel Spolsky camp, there will be a lot of differences in how you hire, but Paul's advice is the same in that [experience doesn't rank as one of his most important criteria](http://www.paulgraham.com/founders.html), [except as a diss](https://twitter.com/danluu/status/1356462960172883969).

Let's say you wanted to hire a plumber or a carptener, what would you choose? "Smart and gets things done" or "experienced and effective"? Ceteris paribus, I'll go for "experienced and effective", doubly so if it's an emergency.

Physical work isn't the kind of thing you can derive from first principles, no matter how smart you are. Consider South Korea after WWII. [Its GDP per capita was lower\
than Ghana, Kenya, and just barely above the Congo](http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/eco_gdp_per_cap_in_195-economy-gdp-per-capita-1950). For various reasons, the new regime didn't have to deal with legacy institutions; and they wanted Korea to become a first-world nation.

The story [I've heard](http://delong.typepad.com/aeh/) is that the government started by subsidizing concrete. After many years making concrete, they wanted to move up the chain and start more complex manufacturing. They eventually got to building ships, because shipping was a critical part of the export economy they wanted to create.

They pulled some of their best business people who had learned skills like management and operations in other manufacturing. Those people knew they didn't have the expertise to build ships themselves, so they contracted it out. They made the choice to work with Scottish firms, because Scotland has a long history of shipbuilding. Makes sense, right?

It didn't work. For historical and geographic reasons, Scotland's shipyards weren't full-sized; they built their ships in two halves and then assembled them. Worked fine for them, because they'd be doing it at scale since the 1800s, and had [world renowned expertise](http://www.educationscotland.gov.uk/scotlandshistory/makingindustrialurban/shipbuilding/index.asp) by the 1900s. But when the unpracticed Koreans tried to build ships using Scottish plans and detailed step-by-step directions, the result was two ship halves that didn't quite fit together and sunk when assembled.

The Koreans eventually managed to start a shipbuilding industry by hiring foreign companies to come and build ships locally, showing people how it's done. And it took decades to get what we would consider basic manufacturing working smoothly, even though one might think that all of the requisite knowledge existed in books, was taught in university courses, and could be had from experts for a small fee. Now, their manufacturing industries are world class, e.g., according to Consumer Reports, Hyundai and Kia produce reliable cars. Going from producing unreliable econoboxes to reliable cars you can buy took over a decade, like it did for Toyota when they did it decades earlier. If there's a shortcut to quality other than hiring a lot of people who've done it before, no one's discovered it yet.

Today, any programmer can take Geoffrey Hinton's [course on neural networks and deep learning](https://www.coursera.org/course/neuralnets), and start applying state of the art machine learning techniques. In software land, you can fix minor bugs in real time. If it takes a whole day to run your regression test suite, you consider yourself lucky because it means you're in one of the few environments that takes testing seriously. If the architecture is fundamentally flawed, you pull out your copy of Feathers' “ [Working Effectively with Legacy Code](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B005OYHF0A/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B005OYHF0A&linkCode=as2&tag=abroaview-20)” and repeatedly apply fixes.

This isn't to say that software isn't hard, but there are a lot of valueable problems that don't need a decade of hard-won experience to attack. But if you want to build a ship, and you "only" have a decade of experience with carpentry, milling, metalworking, etc., well, good luck. You're going to need it. With a large ship, “minor” fixes can take days or weeks, and a fundamental flaw means that your ship sinks and you've lost half a year of work and tens of millions of dollars. By the time you get to something with the complexity of a modern high-performance microprocessor, a minor bug discovered in production costs three months and millions of dollars. A fundamental flaw in the architecture will cost you five years and hundreds of millions of dollars[2](#fn:1).

Physical mistakes are costly. There's no undo and editing isn't simply a matter of pressing some keys; changes consume real, physical resources. You need enough wisdom and experience to avoid common mistakes entirely – especially the ones that can't be fixed.

_Thanks to Sophia Wisdom for comments/corrections/discussion._

### CPU internals series

- [CPU bugs](https://danluu.com/cpu-bugs/)
- [New CPU features since the 80s](//danluu.com/new-cpu-features/)
- [A brief history of branch prediction](//danluu.com/branch-prediction/)
- [The cost of branches and integer overflow checking in real code](//danluu.com/integer-overflow/)
- [Why CPU development is hard](//danluu.com/hardware-unforgiving/)
- [Verilog sucks, part 1](//danluu.com/why-hardware-development-is-hard/)
- [Verilog sucks, part 2](//danluu.com/pl-troll/)

### 2021 comments

In retrospect, I think that I was too optimistic about software in this post. If we're talking about product-market fit and success, I don't think the attitude in the post is wrong and people with little to no experience often do create hits. But now that I've been in the industry for a while and talked to numerous people about infra at various startups as well as large companies, I think creating high quality software infra requires no less experience than creating high quality physical items. Companies that decided this wasn't the case and hire a bunch of smart folks from top schools to build their infra have ended up with low quality, unreliable, expensive, and difficult to operate infrastructure. It just turns out that, if you have very good product-market fit, you don't need your infra to work. Your company can survive and even [thrive while having infra that has 2 9s of uptime and costs an order of magnitude more than your competitor's infra](https://danluu.com/programmer-moneyball/) or [if your product's architecture means that it can't possibly work correctly](https://danluu.com/nothing-works/). You'll make less money than you would've otherwise, but the high order bits are all on the product side. If you contrast that chip companies with inexperienced engineers that didn't produce a working product, well, you can't really sell a product that doesn't work even if you try. If you get very lucky, like if you happened to start deep learning chip company at the right time, you might get big company to acquire your non-working product. But, it's much harder to get an exit like that for a microprocessor.

* * *

1. Comparing [my old company](//danluu.com/glenn-henry-interview/) to another x86 startup founded within the year is instructive. Both started at around the same time. Both had great teams of smart people. Our competitor even had famous software and business people on their side. But it's notable that their hardware implementers weren't a core team of multi-decade industry veterans who had worked together before. It took us about two years to get a working x86 chip, on top of $15M in funding. Our goal was to produce a low-cost chip and we nailed it. It took them five years, with over $250M in funding. Their original goal was to produce a high performance low-power processor, but they missed their performance target so badly that they were forced into the low-cost space. They ended up with worse performance than us, with a chip was 50% bigger (and hence, cost more than 50% more to produce) using team four times our size. They eventually went under, because there's no way they could survive with 4x our burn rate and weaker performance. But, not before burning through $969M in funding (including $230M from patent lawsuits).
    [\[return\]](#fnref:2)
2. A funny side effect of the importance of experience is that age discrimination doesn't affect the areas I've worked in. At 30, I'm bizarrely young for someone who's done microprocessor design. The core folks at my old place were in their 60s. They'd picked up some younger folks along the way, but 30? Freakishly young. People are much younger at the new gig: I'm surrounded by ex-supercomputer folks from [Cray and SGI](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cray#Cray_Research_Inc._and_Cray_Computer_Corporation:_1972_to_1996), who are barely pushing 50, along with a couple kids from [Synplify](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synplicity) and [DESRES](http://www.deshawresearch.com/) who, at 40, are unusually young. Not all hardware folks are that old. In another arm of the company, there are folks who grew up in the FPGA world, which is a lot more forgiving. In that group, I think I met someone who's only a few years older than me. Kidding aside, you'll see younger folks doing RTL design on complex projects at large companies that are willing to spend a decade mentoring folks. But, at startups and on small hardware teams that move fast, it's rare to hire someone into design who doesn't have a decade of experience.

There's a crowd that's even younger than the FPGA folks, even younger than me, working on Arduinos and microcontrollers, doing hobbyist electronics and consumer products. I'm genuinely curious how many of those folks will decide to work on large-scale systems design. In one sense, it's inevitable, as the area matures, and solutions become more complex. The other sense is what I'm curious about: will the hardware renaissance spark an interest in supercomputers, microprocessors, and warehouse-scale computers?
    [\[return\]](#fnref:1)
